---
title: "Dipping my toes into FPGA development"
date: 2026-02-20
tags:
  - hardware
  - fpga
---

I recently came across the "Sipeed Tang Primer 20k", an entry-level FPGA. The 
internet claims that it can be programmed and used with an all-open-source tool 
chain.

During my studies, I dabbled a bit with FPGAs, nothing serious, but enough to 
make me curious. I recall the problems with the decidedly not open-source 
software required to program the boards, and the significant price of the 
boards. And here I was looking at an offer of less than 50 Euro for the board, 
with shipping and a few peripherals to toy around with still below a hundred.

Long story short, I am now the proud owner of such a device. But I have to say 
that "open source toolchain is supported" is technically true, but leaves out 
quite a bit about user friendliness, or the lack thereof. The tools are in the 
Debian repositories (or at least mostly are) but fail silently. Only the newest 
versions work correctly and you have to compile the toolchain from source to 
get everything working. For easy installation, I have assembled a [Docker 
container](https://github.com/twied/TangPrimer-20K-example/tree/master/docker) 
that includes the necessary software and wrapper scripts for ease-of-use.

The official examples and demo projects for the Tang Primer 20k live 
[here](https://github.com/sipeed/TangPrimer-20K-example/), but for a beginner 
like me, these are not well suited. If you are looking for examples that get 
you started and are maybe a bit more basic, look here: 
[https://github.com/twied/TangPrimer-20K-example](
https://github.com/twied/TangPrimer-20K-example)

Examples in this repository:

- **LEDs**: The ext board comes with six orange LEDS located at the right side 
  of the board. They are labeled "5" to "0" from top to bottom. The example 
  displays a simple static pattern.

- **Clock**: A simple example that flashes the LEDs once per second, in an
  alternating pattern.

- **Switches**: This example demonstrates how to read the status of the 5
  switches located at the right side of the board. The LEDs display the result 
  of some boolean functions.

- **Buttons**: This example shows how to read the status of the 5 buttons
  located at the left side of the board. Pushing S0 will turn LED 0 on, pushing 
  S1 will turn the LED off.

- **RGB LED**: This example shows how to drive the RGB LED on the top left of
  the board by turning it yellow at medium intensity.

- **Sound**: This example shows how to use the audio jack on the top right of
  the board by playing a short sound file in a loop.
